[Music]
thank you
whoa
like immortality or perpetual motion time travel
is one of the enduring fantasies of the human race
but until recently The View held by
scientists has been that time travel
is impossible not because there
is any law of physics forbidding
it but because if it were possible it
would create all sorts of paradoxes
stand by for Time Travelers arriving I study
time travel as part of my work as a theoretical
physicist I'm interested in anything that is
fundamental about the way the universe works
I want to know the way things are and how
they behave at the deepest level possible
the Newtonian picture of the universe with its
mechanical view of time has been replaced by
modern ideas of Relativity and quantum mechanics
prior to these time travel had seemed impossible
however research being carried out
by physicists myself included has
now shown that most of the objections to
time travel are not really obstacles at all
we may not be able to build a time machine
tomorrow but at least it now seems that building
one would not be impossible in scientific
circles time travel has become respectable
[Music]
together
as a theoretical physicist I spend a lot of
time just thinking ideal in ideas my laboratory
is my home here in Oxford my equipment is a
personal computer a pencil and a piece of paper
I keep in touch with other scientists around
the world via electronic mail on my computer
one of them is Frank tippler of Tulane University
in New Orleans he has been studying time travel
since the early 1970s the simplest example of
time travel is what I'm doing now sitting in this
armchair I am now moving into the future a more
interesting example however of time travel was
that conducted by two atomic clocks one stationary
in Washington DC and the other one traveling in an
airplane to Europe and back the clock which
traveled on the airplane which accelerated
actually went through less time than
the clock which was stationary so
the clock that moved moved into the
future of the clock that stayed home
Einstein's special theory of relativity predicts
exactly what happens to moving clocks if somehow
the airplane had been moving faster than the speed
of light then it could have traveled into the past
unfortunately the same Theory also predicts
that it takes an infinite amount of energy
even to reach the speed of light therefore simply
increasing your speed is useless for time travel
into the past [Music] atomic clocks and armchairs
are not what we normally think of when we speak
of time travel what usually Springs to mind is
traveling far forwards into the future or back
into the past to see how this might be possible
we need to look at the physicist's picture of time
as H.G Wells wrote in his book The Time
Machine over a hundred years ago you must
follow me carefully I shall have to controvert one
or two ideas that are almost universally accepted
there are really four dimensions three of which we
call the three planes of space and a fourth time
[Music]
our present view of time is captured in the
two great theories of modern physics quantum
theory and Einstein's general relativity Chris
Isham is trying to link the two together in
Einstein's picture of the universe space and time
are considered together as a single sort of block
one of the most striking features of this
block Universe picture of space and time is
that there's a certain sense in which the past
and the present and the future all as it were
exists at once they have the same sort of status
and of course if you're interested in something
like time travel and I suppose it's a certain
sense which you want that to be true because if
you're going to go back into the past the past
had to some sense really be there to be real
from the point of view of modern physics space
and time are not independent entities but they
are linked together in an indissolvable hole
called space-time that means that it's not just
the present that exists the future also exists
the past also exists future and the past are
as real as the present from the point of view of
physics the dinosaurs exist even though there's
been no dinosaur on Earth for 70 million years
now listen to me when people think of the past
they think of it as death and something something
that happened long ago Greece Rome Carthage Egypt
but when does it really begin well isn't
it obvious it begins an instant ago
the dead past is just another
name for the living present
too many Einstein's view of space-time
is a difficult concept to grasp the idea
that our Destinies might be mapped out in
advance take some getting used to [Music]
each instant in this horse's existence represents
an event in space-time and indicates where in the
universe the horse was at that moment the horse
traces out a line in space-time but because time
isn't a separate entity space-time has a very
unusual feature in the space-time view of the
world nothing moves there is no particular moment
called the present space-time shows the entire
history past present and future in space-time
you can look at all times at the same time
our perception of time is due to our
Consciousness moving up into the future
the future however is already there thank you
the space-time view links the past present and
future but it doesn't necessarily dictate the
order that they come in as a time traveler
you would see things happening in a very
disconcerting way you could also expect to meet a
younger or even an older copy of yourself [Music]
thank you
[Music]
time travel is not about changing the
direction of time but about getting space
time itself to take you back into the past
if this is space-time and B is later than a
then the only way of getting back to
a is if there's a loop in space-time
you're late I knew you would be
sir I have a Time Quake approaching
a paradox Louise you've changed the past now you
know damn why we can't change the past it catches
up with us common argument against the possibility
of time travel is called the grandfather Paradox
the idea is this the time traveler gets in his
time machine he goes back into time he shoots to
death his grandfather before his grandfather has
a chance to Father his father therefore the time
traveler cannot exist because his father never
existed therefore since the time traveler doesn't
exist he can't go back into time and shoot
his grandfather we obviously have a logical
contradiction many people have thought in the past
this has ruled out the possibility of time travel
if it is possible to build a time machine
surely people in the future would have
used it to travel into the past but
since no one has seen any tourists
from the future some take this as further
evidence that time travel is impossible
although the grandfather Paradox would seem to
rule out time travel this is not the end of the
story so far we have confined ourselves
to Einstein's view of space-time to see
why time travel is possible we have to take into
account the strange implications of quantum theory
[Music]
at present our best theory of matter and
energy and indeed reality is quantum theory
at the most straightforward level this
allows us to predict how things like
electrons atoms and light interact with each other
for instance the transistors in your television
set were designed using quantum theory
quantum physics really is an extremely successful
Theory at describing whole Atomic physics and
subatomic physics and all sorts of things in
daily life actually depend on quantum mechanics
the whole Communications industry television
sets radio sets digital wristwatch nuclear power
for that matter all these things are very much
quantum mechanical and as part of the theory have
been tested to a phenomenal degree of accuracy one
part in a billion that sort of that sort of side
but also it must be said it has some very peculiar
features about the picture of reality which it
portrays in my most recent work I have been
looking at how quantum theory could be applied
to a hypothetical computer which calculated
according to the principles of quantum mechanics
I did a calculation assuming
that time travel was possible
as part of that calculation I took
information from the output of the
quantum computer and fed it to the input before
it had even left the output now if time travel
into the past was impossible the result of my
calculation should have been a contradiction
I'd expected a paradox but surprisingly I didn't
find one time and again my results showed that
nothing bad happens if information goes back into
the past it all works perfectly and if information
can do it there's no theoretical reason why
human beings couldn't time travel as well
[Music]
it was quantum theory that allowed the message
in my quantum computer to go back in time
the explanation for why this is possible
relies on one of the most bizarre ideas of
quantum theory the many worlds interpretation
well the many world's interpretation of of
quantum mechanism is very peculiar in the
following respect that first of all one has
to say that all of quantum mechanics deals with
probabilities of things happening which is like
tossing a coin he says there's the fundamental
property of nature now when you actually toss
a coin of course usually it does that it
comes down heads or tails now there are
many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics
is when you come to the analogous operation in
quantum theory there is a real sense in
which both possibilities actually occur
so rather than doing either this or that you
get both and these are thought of sometimes
as being therefore different worlds it is as if
you like the universe as a branched or split at
that point into the two copies of itself one way
has come up heads one where it's come up Tails
taken literally the equations of quantum
mechanics say that each time the pinball
hits a bumper it bounces off in all possible
directions consequently the ball follows
many different lines in space-time all of which
actually happen but if all these life histories
are actually happening the obvious questions
are where are they and why do we see only one
well according to the many worlds
interpretation all the life histories
do actually happen but each occurs
in its own separate parallel universe
we only ever see one Universe because there is
almost no communication between the
parallel universes they each proceed
on their independent ways along with their
copies of you me the pinball and the world
what holds for the pinball machine holds for the
universe as a whole reality then does not consist
of one universe but of a Multiverse comprising a
large number of broadly similar parallel universes
the many world's interpretation of quantum
physics is one of these things that generates
intense emotion month threat or physicists some
are very much in favor some very much against but
there is one domain of physics where it's almost
I think obligatory and that's Quantum cosmology
cosmologists use quantum theory to study the
way space and time behave from the creation of
the universe onwards they rely on the many worlds
interpretation in their calculations [Music] the
mini world's interpretation of quantum mechanics
sounds completely bizarre even to most physicists
it seems absolutely crazy that there could be
other copies of ourselves out there with which we
could never interact and never see however there
is one field of physics in which the majority
of practitioners believe in the many worlds
interpretation that's Quantum cosmology a poll was
conducted amongst the leading Quantum cosmologists
in the world and an overwhelming majority of these
people said that they believed in the many
worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics
field equations of quantum cosmology forces
to believe in the many worlds interpretation
not quite clear this is I can see by your face
that you're not certain you don't understand
it's part of the normal process of science to
be deeply skeptical of radical new theories
but it's wrong for scientists not to take a
theory seriously just because it seems outrageous
360 years ago the Inquisition
threatened Galileo with torture
because he claimed that the Earth was rotating
to the Inquisition it was obvious from personal
experience that the Earth doesn't move but here
at the science museum the slow turning of this
Foucault Pendulum shows that Galileo was right
in everyday situations it doesn't matter whether
the existence of parallel universes is taken
seriously just as it doesn't matter whether
the rotation of the earth is taken seriously
but some Concepts like time travel only make
sense if the parallel universes really do exist
one person who is not convinced
by these ideas is Stephen Hawking
he is recently proposed a new
law of physics which says that
time travel is impossible he calls it
the chronology protection principle
were warped and distorted by the matter and energy
in the universe that might therefore be possible
that they could be warped so much that you could
go on a journey and come back before you set out
this could cause all sorts of problems perhaps
fortunately it seems there may be a chronology
protection principle which prevents travel into
the past and so means that we don't have to
rewrite the history books what seems to happen is
that when space-time gets near to allowing travel
into the past a large number of particles appear
on these prevent one warping space-time anymore
the existence of the chronology protection
principle is supported by theoretical work
that I and other people have done Stephen Hawking
has defended recently what he calls the chronology
protection conjecture that says time travel
is absolutely impossible I think he's wrong
I think that looking carefully at
the detailed arguments which people
have produced indicates that it's quite
plausible a time machine can be constructed
at the Paradox of time travel arose because it
was assumed you traveled back to the same universe
but what if we didn't go back to the
same universe we started from what
if we went back to one of the parallel universes
in our original Time Machine model the
space-time Loop took us back into the
past in the same universe quantum theory says
that there are many parallel universes our Loop
instead of joining back onto the same universe
links up at an earlier time with one of these
parallel universes a traveler who enters the
time machine in one universe will not only
end up at an earlier time but also in a different
universe one of the consequences of this movement
is that you could meet up with the copies of
yourself who live in the parallel universes
thank you dudes you guys are gonna go
back in time yeah you are going to have
the most excellent adventure through
history who are you guys were you dude
[Music]
suppose I do an experiment with this time machine
I will travel through Quantum space time back a
few minutes into the past to test the Paradox I
will shoot my slightly younger self let's look
at only two of the many parallel universes in the
left-hand Universe I decide to go into the time
machine and travel back in time to the right hand
Universe just before I set off so long partner
Paradox is avoided because when I traveled
in time I also traveled into another
Universe where I shot a copy of myself
[Music]
General universe and shot me and so I
was free to travel and no Paradox arises
passports please moving ahead to February 12 1999
but what about the other objection to time travel
how do we explain the fact that we have not been
invaded by hordes of tourists from the future
one of the properties of a time machine is that
you can never visit a time which is earlier than
the moment The Time Machine came into existence
for instance if a time machine is created and
um the 21st century then it will be impossible for
visitors in the far future to visit us they can
visit the 21st century but not us in particular
creating a time machine will not make it possible
for us to see the dinosaurs however if another
Advanced civilization created many hundreds of
millions of years ago a time machine it
would be possible to visit the dinosaurs
so if you want to meet your own distant
ancestors you'll either have to find a
naturally occurring time machine somewhere
in the universe or borrow a time machine
created in the past by an extraterrestrial
civilization before anyone claims that UFOs
are visitors from the future let me say that I
think any special in visitation would be much
more obvious and probably much more unpleasant
let me get this straight a thing that looks
like a police box standing in a junkyard it
can move anywhere in time and space [Music]
Doctor Who's Tardis is perhaps the best known
visualization of a time machine but there's
been no shortage of imaginative ideas about
what a practical time machine would look like
[Music]
according to general relativity gravity is a
manifestation of the warping of space and time
matter tells space how to warp how to curve
if you have very massive body which is rotating
then the rotation and massiveness of the body can
twist space and time so drastically
that near the rapidly rotating body
the future Direction actually points into the
past from the point of view of us here on Earth
if such a body actually exists in space that
rapidly rotating body would be a time machine
rotating black holes have perhaps in their
interior regions where time and space are twisted
around in just the way I have described that the
future points into the past however this would be
useless to create a time machine because you could
never get outside of the black hole once you fall
inside if skirting close to a black hole sounds a
little uncomfortable there is another possibility
one of the key ingredient in time travel is a
tear being set up in space time now you can't
do this in ordinary classical general relativity
you can have smooth bends in space and time you
can't rip it apart in the quantum theory you
find that these bends and warps can fluctuate
and they can become contorted in such a way
that you can actually punch through and change
what's technical with an apology of space
so for example you go from a smooth surface
or something like the surface of a donut so it
twists in on itself now an interesting question
is how big can you make that Loop the original
studies tried to say could be a large scale
so you really could go back and see your
grandfather but the more recent ideas early
Visa effects would take place at these very very
tiny distances which you get in quantum gravity
at the moment all routes to time travel are
far beyond our technological capabilities
but more physicists than ever
are doing research in this area
and all the traditional objections to
time travel have turned out to be invalid
my gut feeling is that if technological obstacles
are the only ones in our way then one day time
machines will be built it will be a Pity if
it turns out that time travel is not possible
it would have been exciting to explore
the universe in time as well as space
well the subtle time travel is certainly very
very speculative as indeed is the whole issue
how you combine quantum theory general relativity
but in these sorts of topics ever far they may
appear to be even ordinary daily common sense
you really are trying to address the fundamental
ingredients of reality the really sort of basic
physical level in that sense I think it is a very
important program and well worth pursuing
even though it is I say very speculative
my personal belief is that we know nothing
to definitely rule out the possibility of
time travel we've been doing intensive research
on this subject for many years and we studied
carefully laws of physics we see no reason for
thinking that time travel is forbidden [Music]
almost all of the discussion about time travel is
beyond the present realm of experimental testing
but I have faith in the theory and time
travel is allowed by the theory maybe I'm
an optimist but there's an old saying in physics
whatever is not forbidden is compulsory [Music]
[Music]
now you always say that you wanna be free [Music]
next week in antenna Professor Bob
Williamson explores what has been
described as the next revolution in medicine Gene